# Backwards Compatibility Requirements for Java EE Specifications 

These requirements define the kind of changes that are permissible when
a Java EE expert group updates a Java EE API specification from one
version to the next. They were written in conjunction with the Java EE
spec leads and are intended to apply equally to all Java EE
specifications.

## Classes of users

The requirements below specify the permitted impact of changes to a
specification on three distinct classes of "user". These are defined as
follows:

A. Vendor implementations of the specification. They provide classes
that implement all the mandatory interfaces in the specification.

B. Applications. They will write code that uses the mandatory
interfaces defined in the specification in order to use the facilities
of a particular vendor implementation while remaining portable between
implementations. They will also implement any interfaces defined by the
spec that are expressly intended to be implemented by applications,
such as listener or callback interfaces. This is by far the largest
class of users.

C. Wrapper implementations of the specification. These provide classes
that implement interfaces defined in the specification but they do so
by simply wrapping a vendor implementation and adding some additional
value. Examples are framework developers and resource adapter
developers.

## Permitted changes

This section defines the kinds of changes that are permissible when
defining a new version of a specification. The kinds of changes that
are permissible depend on their impact on each class of users.

**1.** Impact on vendor implementations: it is expected that a new version
of the specification will require existing vendor implementations to be
modified and extended to implement the new version.

**2.** Impact on applications: it must not be necessary for applications
that use the existing version to recompile or modify their existing
code. Changes must be source-code compatible, binary-compatible, and
behavior-compatible for applications that make use of the previous
version of the specification. Adding a new method to an interface that
is intended to be implemented by the application, such as a listener or
callback interface, will always violate this requirement. Adding a new
method to an interface that the application uses but does not implement
will not typically violate this requirement.

**3.** Impact on wrapper implementations: the same restrictions apply as
for applications, but are less absolute. It should not be necessary for
applications that use the existing version to recompile or modify their
existing code. Changes should be source-code compatible,
binary-compatible, and behavior-compatible for applications that make
use of the previous version of the specification. However if it is
considered that there will be no or few such implementations, or if
they would always be provided as an add-on by the developers of vendor
implementations, then this requirement may be relaxed after careful
consideration by the specification's expert group.

## Behaviour compatibility

**4.** Changes must be behaviour-compatible for applications that make use
of the previous version of the specification. This means that
applications that change to using the new version of the specification
do not see changes to behaviour that were mandated by the previous
version of the specification.

If the previous version of the specification states that if the
application calls method X, then Y should happen, this must continue to
be the case in the new version of the specification.

However, where behaviour was undefined or optional in the previous
version of the specification, it may be permissible to define more
explicit behaviour in a later version. If the previous version of the
specification does not define or mandate how a particular API method
behaves in a particular use case then it may be permissible for a later
version to define it. In deciding whether such a change is permissible,
the expert group must give consideration to the behaviour of existing
implementations, especially the reference implementation.  Just because
a particular behaviour wasn't specified doesn't mean applications
haven't come to depend on it.

Determining the compatibility impact of cases that throw exceptions can
be tricky. In many cases exceptions are defined to be thrown if certain
error conditions exist. If those conditions correspond to programming
errors or configuration errors, it might be reasonable to redefine
those cases to have a new non-error function, such that the exception
would no longer be thrown. However, if the exception is thrown in a
case where the application might reasonably be written to depend on
this exception in normal operation, changing the behavior would break
the application. Knowing the difference between these cases is a
judgement call.

**Example:** if the previous version of the specification either
stated that the effect of calling X under certain circumstances is
undefined, or made no mention of it, then it is permissible for a later
version of the specification to state what the required behaviour under
these circumstances is.

**Example:** if the previous version of the specification stated
explicitly that a certain use case was not permitted and that
implementations may throw an exception but were not required to do so,
then it is permissible for a later version of the specification to make
such an exception mandatory, or to define new behavior for this case.

**5.** The only circumstances when it is permissible to break
behavior-compatibility is when there is a serious security or
functional defect in the behavior defined by the specification. In this
exceptional case it is permissible to correct the behavior or cause it
to throw an exception.

## Making an interface or method optional

The Java EE 6 specification, section EE 6.1.3 "Pruned Java
Technologies" defines a process to "prune" technologies from the
platform. "The result of successfully applying this policy to a feature
is not the actual deletion of the feature but rather the conversion of
the feature from a required component of the platform into an optional
component. No actual removal from the specification occurs, although
the feature may be removed from products at the choice of the product
vendor."

This process is intended to apply to entire specifications (in which
case all its API definitions become optional) though in rare cases it
could apply to major pieces of functionality in an existing
specification, such as EJB entity beans, which may become optional in
Java EE 7. This process is not intended to apply to individual methods,
and is not intended for the case where the functionality remains
unchanged but one set of interfaces or methods is replaced by another,
especially when many applications are known to still use the existing
interfaces or methods.

## Deprecated methods

**6.** An expert group may decide to designate a method or interface as
being "deprecated" when its use is no longer recommended or when the
expert group considers that a different interface or method should be
used instead. This can be stated in the specification and in the
relevant javadoc. However the @Deprecated annotation must not be used
as this is noisy and annoying for users. The only exception to this is
if there is a serious security or functional defect in the method or
interface.

## Serialization compatibility

**7.** Some Java EE specifications define classes that implement the
javax.io.Serializable interface.  The
[Serialization Specification](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/platform/serialization/spec/version.html)
has details on the allowed changes to a class that retain serialization
compatibility.  Applications using a newer version of a serializable
class must be able to read streams written by older versions of the
same class, and must also be able to write streams that can be read by
older versions of the same class.  In general, a serializable class
should define a
[serialVersionUID](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/platform/serialization/spec/class.html#a4100)
field in the first version of the class, to ensure subsequent versions
are recognized as the same class.  Remember that Exception classes are
always serializable.

## Some specific implications

This brief FAQ summarizes the implications of these
backward-compatibility requirements on various possible types of
change:

**Q1. Is it permissible to add a new interface to an existing specification?**

Yes.

**Q2. Is it permissible to remove an existing interface from an
existing specification?**

No, because this would violate rules 2 and 3 above. Note that it is
also not permissible to mark it as deprecated.

**Q3. Is it permissible to add a new method to an existing interface?**

If applications are required to implement this interface (e.g., if it
were a listener or callback interface) then this is never permissible
(see Rule 2 for a full description). If it is considered that there
will be no or few wrapper implementations of the interface, or if they
would always be provided as an add-on by the developers of vendor
implementations, it may be permissible to add a new method to an
existing interface after careful consideration by the specification's
expert group  (see Rule 3 for a full description).

**Q4. Is it permissible to remove an existing method from an existing
interface?**

No, because this would violates rules 2 and 3 above.

**Q5. Is it permissible to change the behavior of an existing method?**

Where behavior was undefined or optional in the previous version of the
specification then it may be permissible to define more explicit
behavior in a later version.  In deciding whether such a change is
permissible, the expert group must give consideration to the behavior
of existing implementations, especially the reference implementation.
Just because a particular behavior wasn't specified doesn't mean
applications haven't come to depend on it.  Expert groups should strive
to completely define behavior, leaving behavior explicitly undefined or
optional only when necessary to accommodate existing implementations or
anticipated implementation flexibility.

If the change would change behavior that is explicitly defined in the
previous version of the specification, then it is not permitted because
it would violate rules 2 and 3 above. However, if there is a serious
security or functional defect in the method, then the expert group may
decide to waive this restriction.

**Q6. Is it permissible to define new behavior for what was previously
an error case?**

Sometimes.  It depends on the purpose of the error case.  If a program
could reasonably expect a method to throw an exception when it detects
bad input from a user, that behavior should not change unless the
definition of valid user input changes.  If a method throws an
exception when it detects a programming error, such as a null parameter
that is required to be non-null, it may be changed to define new
meaning for that previously invalid use.  Obviously judgment is
required to determine whether a reasonable program might depend on
detecting the error case.
